Common themes concerning the origin and etiology of chromosomal aneuploidy are at last beginning to emerge, aided by studies comparing the different chromosomal conditions (reviewed by Hassold and Hunt [2001]). Mei- otic errors of the oocytes predominate, especially errors originating at the first meiotic stage. In addition, most, if not all, human trisomies are affected by increasing maternal age, although the magnitude of the effect varies between different classes of trisomy (Risch et al. 1986; Morton et al. 1988). In general, the percentage of tri- somies among all clinically recognized pregnancies climbs from 2% for women !25 years of age to 35% for women 140 years of age (Hassold and Chiu 1985).
Altered genetic recombination has been identified as a risk factor as well. In model organisms, absent or reduced levels of recombination, along with suboptimally placed recombinant events, increase the likelihood of malsegre- gation (Rasooly et al. 1991; Moore et al. 1994; Sears et
al. 1995; Zetka and Rose 1995; Koehler et al. 1996; Ross et al. 1996; Krawchuk and Wahls 1999). Exchanges too close to the centromere or too close to the telomere seem most susceptible to error. The association between altered meiotic recombination and trisomy has been confirmed in human nondisjunction, and significant reduction in recombination has been found for all meiosis I (MI)– derived trisomies studied to date, including trisomies 15, 16, 18, 21, and X of maternal origin and trisomy 21 and Klinefelter syndrome (47 XXY) of paternal origin (Has- sold et al. 1991, 1995; Lamb et al. 1996, 1997a; Bugge et al. 1998; Robinson et al. 1998; Savage et al. 1998; Thomas et al. 2001).
Previous studies of maternal MI-derived trisomy 21 estimated that 40% of the cases were derived from oo- cytes in which no meiotic exchange had occurred along chromosome 21 (Lamb et al. 1996, 1997a). Of those maternally derived MI cases that did undergo single exchange, the majority of the exchanges were located in the distal 6.5 Mb of the chromosome. In addition, so-called meiosis II (MII)–derived cases were highly as- sociated with pericentromeric exchanges, or those that occurred within the most centromeric 3.5 Mb of chro- mosome 21. This association led to the hypothesis that many of the cases classified as MII were actually the result of errors initiated in MI. Thus, similar to what is observed in experimental organisms, telomeric or pericentromeric exchanges increase the susceptibility of nondisjunction for human chromosome 21.
A key unanswered question concerns the potential association between maternal age and altered recom- bination patterns. Previous studies of trisomy 21 failed to identify any such association; however, the sample size was relatively small with respect to the amount of variation in recombination along this short chromo- some (Lamb et al. 1996). Intriguingly, studies of other chromosomes have raised the possibility of a connection between maternal age and recombination. In examining chromosome 15 nondisjunction, Robinson et al. (1998) found that the age of the mother was significantly higher among maternal MI-derived errors with multiple re- combinants versus those with zero or only one detect- able recombinant. This finding suggested that cases with multiple recombinants might be more resistant to non- disjunction because of an increase in bivalent stability. Similarly, an analysis of maternal nondisjunction of the X chromosome showed that the mean maternal age of cases with recombination was significantly older than that of cases with no recombination (Thomas et al. 2001). This same pattern was observed for trisomy 18, although the difference was not statistically significant (Bugge et al. 1998). However, there was no association between maternal age and the position of exchanges along the nondisjoined chromosome, for either trisomy 18 or trisomy of the maternal sex chromosome.
An association between maternal age and recom- bination has also been identified among the normally disjoining population (Kong et al. 2004). On the basis of genomewide microsatellite data compiled from 123,000 individuals, a positive correlation was iden- tified between maternal age and the level of maternal recombination, determined from live-birth offspring. Kong et al. (2004) suggest not that the recombination rate of eggs increases with maternal age but rather that the apparent increase is the consequence of selec- tion—that is, high recombination counts decrease the likelihood of nondisjunction and thereby increase the chance of a gamete becoming a live birth. It is important to note that this maternal age effect is very slight, es- timated at two additional recombinants across the entire genome over a 25-year period.
The number of maternal MI-derived trisomy 21 cases available for analysis has tripled since the last analy- ses of exchange and age (Lamb et al. 1996, 1997a). Additionally, the physical map of chromosome 21 has been completed (Hattori et al. 2000), allowing meiotic exchange intervals to be determined with a greater de- gree of accuracy. As a result, the current trisomy 21 population can be subdivided by maternal age at the time of conception, and the exchange analyses can be determined for each age group.